A digital elevation model (DEM) is a digital file consisting of 
terrain elevations for ground positions at regularly spaced 
horizontal intervals. The USGS produces five different digital 
elevation products. Although all are identical in the manner the 
data are structured, each varies in sampling interval, 
geographic reference system, areas of coverage, and accuracy; 
with the primary differing characteristic being the spacing, 
or sampling interval, of the data. 

The five DEM products: 

7.5-Minute DEM 30- x 30-meter data spacing 
1-Degree DEM 3- x 3-arc-second data spacing 
2-Arc-Second DEM 2- x 2-arc-second data spacing 
15-Minute Alaska DEM 2- x 3-arc-second data spacing 
7.5-Minute Alaska DEM 1- x 2-arc-second data spacing 

Over the years, the USGS has collected digital elevation data 
using a number of production strategies including manual 
profiling from photogrammetric stereomodels; stereomodel 
digitizing of contours; digitizing topographic map contour
plates; converting hypsographic and hydrographic tagged vector 
files; and performing autocorrelation via automated photogrammetric 
systems. Of these techniques, the derivation of DEM's from vector 
hypsographic and hydrographic data produces the most accurate
model, and is the preferred method. 

Applications 

DEM's may be used in the generation of three-dimensional graphics
displaying terrain slope, apsect (direction of slope), and terrain 
profiles between selected points. At the USGS, DEM's have been 
used in combination with digital raster graphics (DRG's), digital 
line graphs (DLG's), and digital orthophoto quadrangles (DOQ's) 
to both enhance the visual information for data extraction and 
revision purposes and to create aesthetically pleasing and 
dramatic hybrid digital images. Non-graphic applications such as 
modeling terrain and gravity data for use in the search for energy 
resources, calculating the volume of proposed reservoirs, and 
determining landslide probability have also been developed. 

Data Format 

A DEM file is organized into a series of three records, A, B, 
and C. The A record contains information defining the general 
characteristics of the DEM, including its name, boundaries, units
of measurement, minimum and maximum elevations, number of B 
records, and projection parameters. Each B record consists of 
an elevation profile with associated header information, and the 
C record contains accuracy data. Each file contains a single A and 
C record, while there is a separate B record for each elevation 
profile. More detailed information about the organization of a 
DEM file can be found in the National Mapping Program Technical 
Instructions, Standards for Digital Elevation Models and Digital 
Elevations Models: Data User's Guide. 
